Automatic Plant Irrigation System using Arduino, which automatically provides water to your plants 
and keep you updated by sending message to your cell phone. In This Plant Watering System, Soil 
Moisture Sensor checks the moisture level in the soil and if moisture level is low then Arduino 
switches On a water pump to provide water to the plant. Water pump gets automatically off when 
system finds enough moisture in the soil. Whenever system switched On or off the pump, a message 
is sent to the user via GSM module, updating the status of water pump and soil moisture. This system 
is very useful in Farms, gardens, home etc. This system is completely automated and there is no need 
for any human intervention. 
Here we have used TTL SIM800 GSM module. The SIM800 is a complete Quad-band GSM/GPRS Module which can 
be embedded easily by customer or hobbyist. SIM900 GSM Module provides an industry-standard interface; 
the SIM800 delivers GSM/GPRS 850/900/1800/1900MHz performance for voice, SMS, Data with low power con-
-sumption. The design of this SIM800 GSM Module is slim and compact.
Quad - band GSM/GPRS module in small size.
GPRS Enabled
TTL Output
Arduino is used for controlling whole the process of this Automatic Plant Watering System. The output 
of soil sensor circuit is directly connected to digital pin D7 of Arduino. A LED is used at the sensor 
circuit, this LED’s ON state indicates the presence of moisture in the soil and OFF state indicates 
the absense of moisture in the soil.
GSM module is used for sending SMS to the user. Here we have used TTL SIM800 GSM module, which gives 
and takes TTL logic directly (user may use any GSM module). A LM317 Voltage regulator is used to power 
the SIM800 GSM module. LM317 is very sensitive to voltage rating and it is recommended to read its 
datasheet before use. Its operating voltage rating is 3.8v to 4.2v (please prefer 3.8v to operate it).
If moisture is present in soil then there is conduction between the two probes of Soil Moisture sensor 
and due to this conduction, transistor Q2 remains in triggered/on state and Arduino Pin D7 remains Low. 
When Arduino reads LOW signal at D7, then it sends SMS to user about “Soil Moisture is Normal. Motor 
turned OFF” and water pump remains in Off state.
Now if there is no Moisture in soil then Transistor Q2 becomes Off and Pin D7 becomes High. Then Arduino 
reads the Pin D7 and turns On the water motor and also sends message to user about “Low Soil Moisture 
detected. Motor turned ON”. Motor will automatically turn off when there is sufficient moisture in the soil. 
Further check the Demonstration Video and Code (given at the end) for better understanding the project 
working process.
